---
layout: page
title: About Me
tags: about
nav_id: about
---

My interest in technology started as far back as I can remember. 
I was the type of kid that would ask for a Walkman and have it 
disassembled in a matter of minutes, just to see how it worked. I wrote 
my first program in a high school robotics class. From that moment on I 
have been fascinated with electronics, software, and connecting the two 
together. After graduating high school, I decided to go straight into a 
career path. A great area, which I felt, was a blend of both areas of 
interest would be working as an electrician. I spent the next 12 years 
working, primarily on, commercial and industrial electrical installation 
projects. The projects ranged anywhere from automated lighting systems 
to industrial scale recycling automation. About 8 years into my career, 
as an electrician, I felt that I needed to take myself to the next level 
and focus more on the software aspect. So, I went back to school 
full-time. Directly out of college I got a job with an insurance company 
as a developer. This was about the same time as the advent of smart 
phones. After my first mobile project I found myself very attracted to 
developing on mobile platforms. The primary reason being it is an 
intimate technology where we, as developers, get the opportunity to 
directly impact a user's life. I have since worked on many iOS and 
Android projects, most recently and notably the Wendy's Mobile Ordering 
application. Throughout the years I have worked on many aspects of the 
technology stack ranging from Bluetooth 4 to back-end services and 
databases. In my free time I like developing anything IoT related, wood 
working, traveling, hiking, and spending time with my family.
